COM3505 week 08 notes
===

# The Lecture

This week's [lecture slides are
here](https://docs.google.com/presentation/d/11D3Y2SA8dp3AO7oDasdjU2PHXWw0Xh2OPPrDj-bEaTk/edit?usp=sharing)
(lecture 7, week 8).


# WARNINGS!!!

We're now using **LiPo** batteries -- please **review the safety
instructions** below and be sure to follow them. If in doubt ask a member of
staff.

Also note that the unPhone is a **live R&D project**, and has a full set of
attendant rough edges and unfinished TODOs to go with it! The hardware we give
you should all be working and stable, but some of the published software
examples may be buggy, and plenty of the code is non-optimal in various ways.
We include extra bugs on purpose to make your learning experience more
realistic :)


# Learning Objectives

Our objectives this week are to:

- start programming on the unPhone
- [choose a project](Week08/Projects.mkd)
- understand more about the protocols used to communicate between external
  devices and the ESP32 (in the lecture)


# Assignments and Assessment

Your GitLab repository will now contain:

- `IFTTTThing`, a model solution to last week's exercise. (Note: this assumes
  you have an ultrasonic sensor attached to pins A0 and A2 [like
  this](Week08/ifttt.jpg).)
- `MyEtchAThing`, a template for a simple Etch-A-Sketch like game on the
  unPhone. See the **TODO** comment, and add code to make the sketch work.

You need to choose a project soon:

- Review the lecture slides on project options, and think about which project
  you want to do in your team. If you need additional hardware pick it up from
  teaching staff ASAP.

Finally, there are more examples to play with in
[unphone/examples](https://gitlab.com/hamishcunningham/unphone/tree/master/examples);
try loading one, e.g. [BigDemo](
https://gitlab.com/hamishcunningham/unphone/tree/master/examples/BigDemo) or
[BigDemoIDF](https://gitlab.com/hamishcunningham/unphone/tree/master/examples/BigDemoIDF).


## Coding Hints

We're using Adafruit's graphics library to draw on the LCD screen, see:
https://learn.adafruit.com/adafruit-gfx-graphics-library?view=all

The touch screen uses the STMPE610 library; there's a description here:
https://learn.adafruit.com/adafruit-2-4-tft-touch-screen-featherwing?view=all#resistive-touch-screen


# Reading

The [unPhone hardware schematics are described
here](https://gitlab.com/hamishcunningham/unphone/blob/master/doc/README.mkd).
These are quite hard to understand from a standing start, and we don't expect
you to develop a detailed knowledge of these. Nevertheless it would be useful
to skim the material and get a general sense of the kind of terms used.

Secondly, following on from the work we did in the last couple of weeks (on
provisioning and over-the-air updates), have a look at these:

- _Challenges with Wi-Fi Provisioning for Embedded Systems_
  http://www.argenox.com/library/challenges-with-wi-fi-provisioning-for-embedded-systems/
- _A Crash Course In Provisioning Wireless Networks_
  https://www.link-labs.com/blog/provisioning-wireless-networks
- _ESP32 vs. other industrial IoT microcontrollers_
  http://uhurumkate.blogspot.com/2017/09/esp32-as-professional-gradeindustry-40.html

Finally, check your knowledge of LiPo batteries (and see below):

- NERC. 2016. “NERC Guidance on the Safe Use of Lithium Batteries.”
  http://www.nerc.ac.uk/about/policy/safety/procedures/guidance-lithium-batteries/


# LiPo Safety

## What are lithium polymer batteries?

Lithium Polymer (or LiPo) cells are one of the most effective commercially
available rechargeable batteries, having high energy and power density. These
batteries are used in all manner of mobile applications and are particularly
popular with remote control (RC) hobbyists.

You will be given a LiPo battery as part of the unPhone project hardware for
COM3505. The battery is fitted inside a case with the other electronics, but
is potentially dangerous if the case is damaged or removed, or the electronics
connected to the battery are damaged.

## What are the dangers?

Although these cells are very useful, they can be dangerous when mistreated or
misused. There are three main causes of cell failure: puncture, over-heating
and over-charging. If the battery fails as a result of any of these, hazardous
electrolyte leakage, fire or explosions may occur.

The rate of transfer of energy within the battery is strongly linked to its
internal heat; when over-heated the cell's long term performance will degrade,
more energy is released and the battery gets hotter, creating a dangerous
feedback loop. If this continues the electrolyte will vaporise and cause the
battery to expand, which may lead to fire or even an explosion.

This same effect can be caused by over-charging the battery, or in some cases
even just leaving it charged in the wrong circumstances. Henry (one of our
previous teaching assistants on the course) used to fly an RC helicopter that
ran off a multi-cell LiPo pack. Having forgotten to discharge it, it was left
in a container in his shed. Many months later the cell exploded in a ball of
flame nearly burning down the shed!

The sensitive chemistry of the batteries can also lead to fire if the battery
gets punctured and vents into the air.

## Avoiding problems

**ALWAYS** take the following precautions when using LiPos in COM3505:

- Only use the battery as installed in the hardware we gave you.
- Only charge the battery using the board which we gave you.
- Regularly inspect the hardware, especially if you need to open the case to
  make connections; check the battery visually for damage, heating or possible
  puncture. If you spot anything potentially problematic inform a member of
  staff immediately.
- If a battery becomes hot:
    - if it appears safe to do so, unplug it from the power source
    - warn others present to move away from the battery and do so yourself
    - inform a member of staff immediately
- If you are at all unsure of any of these instructions please inform a member
  of staff.
- See also https://goo.gl/HyrxFb
